PRACTICAL NO. 5
Aim: Analyse the packets provided in lab and solve the questions using Wireshark:
1. What web server software is used by www.snopes.com?
2. About what cell phone problem is the client concerned?
3. According to Zillow, what instrument will Ryan learn to play?
4. How many web servers are running Apache?
5. What hosts (IP addresses) think that jokes are more entertaining when they are
explained?
Solution:
1. What web server software is issued by www.snopes.com?
Analysis – The domain name can be found from host header, so we will set host header
column where we will see all domain name. Select any HTTP request and expand the Hypertext
Transfer Protocol then right click on Host header and then Apply as Column.
Now we can see our host www.snopes.com in host column.
Right click on the selected packet and then select Follow TCP stream.
2. About what cell phone problem is the client concerned?
Analysis – Client is talking about cell so we search for cell keyword in whole packets. We
will use regular expression for searching the ‗cell‘ keyword. Apply frame matches ―(?i)cell‖ .
After applying the filter now, we will start to check every HTTP request. We noticed in the first
HTTP request cell keyword is in the URL and it was about cell phone charging issue.
3. According to Zillow, what instrument will Ryan learn to play?
Analysis – As we did in the last challenge, we will apply a regular expression filter for the
Zillow keyword. Apply frame matches ―(?i)zillow‖. After applying the filter, we found only one packet with the Zillow keyword
Now go to file and select Export Objects > HTTP. It will save all objects from the packet.
Click on save All.
After saving all files in a directory , we found a swf file with the name Zillow. After opening the
flash file, we see that Ryan was trying to learn the saxophone.
4. How many web servers are running Apache?
Analysis – The web server name can be retrieved from HTTP response header. So will apply
filter http.response and we can see all http response packets.
Now we will set the server header as column select any packet and right click on it then select
Apply as Column.
Now can see the server column where all server names are displayed.
Now we have to check how many Apache packets are there. We can‘t count manually for each
packet so we will apply another filter http.server contains ―Apache‖.
After applying filter go to Statistics > Endpoints
It will show all connections.
Check the limit to display filter then it will show the actual Apache connections. Now it is
showing 22 connections but we will exclude 192.168.1.71 because it is client‘s IP not a server
IP so there are actual 21 Apache servers.
5. What hosts (IP addresses) think that jokes are more entertaining when they are
explained?
Analysis – Lets apply the filter with joke keyword. Apply frame contains ―joke‖ and now we
can see all requests with joke keyword.
We can see the messages are coming from 173.241.244.7 and 173.241.244.99