PRACTICAL NO. 9
Aim: Email Forensic:
A. Mail Service Providers. B. Email protocols. C. Recovering emails. D. Analyzing email header. Solution:
A.Mail Service Providers:
An email service provider (ESP) is a company that offers email marketing or bulk email
services. An ESP may provide tracking information showing the status of email sent to each
member of an address list. ESPs also often provide the ability to segment an address list into
interest groups or categories, allowing the user to send targeted information to people who they
believe will value the correspondence. Here are nine features to look for when you select your business email service:
 Spam Filter - Spam messages are a huge time waster. You don't want to spend your
valuable time reading them. That's why you want an email service that has a system in place
to detect and filter out inbox spam.  Reliability - Your business email provider needs to be up and running when you need it. Your email should always be available. Email downtime could result in lost or unhappy
customers.  Integration - Some email services work well with other business tools such as calendars, and productivity suites. If your business relies heavily on such tools, consider an email
package that integrates with the other tools you already use.  Security - With email hacks being a regular news item, you want your business email
provider to offer strong measures to keep your accounts secure. You need to keep your
messages safe and don't want any unauthorized use of your email account.  Ease of Use - As your business grows, more of your staff members need to create and use
email accounts. Reduce staff training time by selecting an email service provider that's
easy to use.  Archive Capabilities - The best business email providers provide a way for you to save, store, and organize your email messages and drafts. For many businesses, keeping an
accurate and well-organized record of business communication is vital.  Advanced Features - When running a small business, advanced email features such as the
ability to recall sent messages or schedule tasks within email can be
important. Which advanced features are most important depends on your unique business
needs.  Reputation - Your business email service provider needs to have a good
reputation. Remember, your email address is one of the first pieces of information prospective Clients see.  Storage - When selecting an email service provider, keep in mind the amount of storage
space included with your account. You don't want to run out of space. Types of Popular Email Service Providers are as follows:
1.Gmail:
One of the most popular and best email service providers, Gmail is used for personal and
business communications alike. According to statistics reported by TechCrunch in 2016, over a billion people use Gmail. Gmail has a good reputation and includes many advanced features such as the Undo Send
feature and Email Forwarding. Since this service is owned by search engine giant, Google, naturally it includes a
powerful search utility and filter system. Google has also added strengthened security measures such as two-step verification and
powerful spam filters to make it less likely that your account is hacked or that you receive junk
messages. Finally, it integrates cleanly with popular productivity tools including Google Calendar and
Google Docs. 2. Outlook:
Microsoft's Outlook.com email provider is a strong option if you're looking for the best
email provider. Statistics from Microsoft show that Outlook had over 400 million users in 2016. This popular email package has the support and resources of tech giant Microsoft behind
it. Outlook.com offers advanced features such as Clutter, which finds emails that are likely
of low priority and separates them from your inbox. Another advanced Outlook.com feature is the ability to Undelete, or recover an email after
you've accidentally discarded a message. Outlook integrates well with popular software including other Microsoft products. 3.iCloud Mail:
iCloud email is a possible email choice if you frequently access your email package from
your Apple mobile device. Apple employs several security features to make sure that your
iCloud account is not compromised including two-step verification or two-factor
authentication. There's also a spam filter. 4. Yahoo Mail:
Yahoo! was one of the early Internet companies, dating back to 1994. Yahoo!
Mail is popular with many users. In 2016, it was announced that the company was acquired by Verizon. Despite the recent changes to Yahoo! ownership, you can still sign up for a Yahoo! Mail
account.Some Yahoo! Mail features you can benefit from if you choose it as your email provider
include:
Auto deletion of Trash messages after 90 days Huge storage capacity (1 TB) Built-in
web search tool, calendar, and notepad Spam filters and SSL encryption. 5. AOL Mail:
AOL is another early Internet company. In the 1980s the company was known as
America Online.It was purchased by Verizon in 2015. The email component of the organization remains a popular and strong service that has
earned its place on this list of the best email services.Key AOL Mail features include advanced
spam filters and virus protection. It's also known for the ability to personalize your email address with the
MyAddress feature that lets you select your own email domain name. 6. Zoho Mail:
Although Zoho Mail has several premium levels available, there is also a free level
available that allows you to have up to 25 users. For many small businesses, this will be enough—so we have included the email service on
our list of the best free email providers. With the free level of Zoho Mail, you are limited to 5 GB of storage per user. It does
include antivirus protection and spam filtering. This email service integrates with other Zoho productivity tools such as calendar, tasks, and notes. B.Email Protocols:
E-mail Protocols are set of rules that help the client to properly transmit the information to
or from the mail server. The most commonly used Email protocols on the internet - POP3, IMAP and SMTP. Each one of them has specific function and way of work. 1. POP3:
Post Office Protocol version 3 (POP3) is a standard mail protocol used to receive emails
from a remote server to a local email client. POP3 allows you to download email messages on your
local computer and read them even when you are offline. Note, that when you use POP3 to
connect to your email account, messages are downloaded locally and removed from the email
server.
This means that if you access your account from multiple locations, that may not bethe
best option for you. On the other hand, if you use POP3, your messages are stored on your local
computer, which reduces the space your email account uses on your web server. By default, the POP3 protocol works on two ports:
 Port 110 - this is the default POP3 non-encrypted port
 Port 995 - this is the port you need to use if you want to connect using POP3 securely. 2. IMAP:
The Internet Message Access Protocol (IMAP) is a mail protocol used for accessing
email on a remote web server from a local client. IMAP and POP3 are the two most commonly used Internet mail protocols for retrieving
emails. Both protocols are supported by all modern email clients and web servers. While the POP3 protocol assumes that your email is being accessed only from one
application, IMAP allows simultaneous access by multiple clients. This is why IMAP is more
suitable for you if you're going to access your email from different locations or if your messages
are managed by multiple users. By default, the IMAP protocol works on two ports:
 Port 143 - this is the default IMAP non-encrypted port
 Port 993 - this is the port you need to use if you want to connect using IMAP securely
3. SMTP:
SMTP stands for Simple Mail Transfer Protocol. It was first proposed in 1982. It is a
standard protocol used for sending e-mail efficiently and reliably over the internet. Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP) is the standard protocol for sending emails
across the Internet. By default, the SMTP protocol works on three ports:
 Port 25 - this is the default SMTP non-encrypted port
 Port 2525 - this port is opened on all SiteGround servers in case port 25 is filtered (by your
ISP for example) and you want to send non-encrypted emails with SMTP
 Port 465 - this is the port used if you want to send messages using SMTP securely
C. Recovering email using AccessData FTK:
Step1: Start AccessData FTK by right-clicking the AccessData FTK desktop icon, clicking Run
as administrator, and clicking Continue in the UAC message box (if
you‘re using Vista). If you‘re prompted with a warning message and/or notification (see Figure
below), click OK as needed to continue. If asked whether you want to save the existing default
case, click Yes.
Recovering Email:
Start AccessData FTK and click Start a new case, then click OK. Click Next until you
reach the Refine Case - Default dialog box.
Step 2: When the AccessData FTK Startup dialog box opens, click Start a new case, and then
click OK. Step 3: In the New Case dialog box, type your name for the investigator name, and type the case
number and case name. Click Browse, navigate to and click your work folder, click OK, and then click Next. Step 4: In the Case Information dialog box, enter your investigator information, and then click
Next.
Step 5:Click Next until you reach the Refine Case - Default dialog box, shown in Figure below. Step 6:Click the Email Emphasis button, and then click Next. Step 7:Click Next until you reach the Add Evidence to Case dialog box, and then click the Add
Evidence button. Step 8: In the Add Evidence to Case dialog box, click the Individual File option button (see Figure
below), and then click Continue. Step 9:In the Select File dialog box, navigate to your work folder, click the Jim_shu‘s.pst file, and
then click Open. Step 10:In the Evidence Information dialog box, click OK.
Step 11: Click the Email Emphasis button, and then Click Next until you reach the Add Evidence
to Case dialog box, and then click the Add Evidence button.
Step 12: In the Add Evidence to Case dialog box, click the Individual File option button, and then click Continue.
Step 13: When the Add Evidence to Case dialog box opens, click Next. In the Case summary
dialog box, click Finish.
Step 14: When the Add Evidence to Case dialog box opens, click Next. In the Case
summary dialog box, click Finish. Step 15: When FTK finishes processing the file, in the main FTK window, click the E- mail
Messages button, and then click the Full Path column header to sort the records (see Figure
below).
For email recovery follow the below steps:
 Click the E-Mail tab. In the tree view, click to expand all folders, and then click the
Deleted Items folder.  Select any message say Message0001 right click and select option Launch
Detached Viewer and you can see detail of deleted message.
For analyzing header follow following steps:
 Click the E-Mail tab. In the tree view, click to expand all folders, and then click the Inbox
folder. In the File List pane at the upper right, click Message0003; as shown in the pane
at the bottom, it‘s from Sam and is addressed to Jim_shu@comcast.net.
 Right-click on any message say Message0003 in the File List pane and click Export File.
 In the Export Files dialog box, click OK.
 FTK saves exported files in the HTML format with no extension.
 Double-click Message0003.html to view it in a Web browser.
